UPANG-FA.pdf 

MSME PATHWAYS: SMART LOAN SUPPORT
FOR THE INFORMAL SECTOR






A Capstone Project Presented to the Faculty of the
College of Information Technology Education
PHINMA - University of Pangasinan




In Partial Fulfillment 
of the Requirements for the Degree
BACHELOR OF SCIENCE IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY




by
JUSTIN MC NEAL GONZALES CARONONGAN
ELI GABRIEL TAMONDONG SORIANO
JOHN LLOYD PIMENTEL 
FENIEL BARTE
JOSHUA CO


March 2026
Chapter 2
METHODOLOGY
This chapter discusses the methodology employed in developing the proposed system, MSME Pathways: Smart Loan Support for the Informal Sector. It presents the development methodology, system architecture overview, tools and technologies used, population and locale of the study, data gathering techniques, sources of data, treatment of data, and ethical considerations.


Development Methodology
This section explains the development methodology used in the study, including the selected software development model, the Scrum events followed by the team, and the corresponding sprint deliverables.
Software Development Model. The study employs the Agile Software Development Model using the Scrum approach. Scrum supports incremental delivery through short development cycles, enabling the research team to prioritize features, validate requirements, and continuously improve system components based on stakeholder feedback. This model is suitable for MSME Pathways because the system includes complex and interdependent features such as AI-enabled guidance and profiling, as well as blockchain-based transaction integrity mechanisms that require iterative refinement and staged integration.
The Scrum approach is appropriate for the project scope because it encourages frequent feedback and progressive enhancement of system functionality and usability. In the context of informal-sector microentrepreneurs, user needs and constraints (e.g., limited time, varying digital literacy, and practical concerns during lending interactions) are better addressed through repeated validation of interface design, content clarity, and guidance accuracy. Scrum also supports risk reduction by enabling early testing of high-impact modules such as the AI chatbot and profiling logic, while allowing blockchain components to be integrated and verified gradually to ensure system stability and reliability.
Within the study, the researchers functioned as the development team and coordinated with advisers and stakeholder representatives for requirement validation and sprint feedback. The Product Backlog served as the main artifact for organizing priorities, while each sprint produced an increment that was reviewed for completeness and academic relevance. In this study, design, development, testing, and deployment are treated as engineering activities performed within each sprint, not as formal Scrum phases.


Figure 1 presents the software development model adopted in the study, illustrating the flow of activities involved in system development.
Figure 1
Scrum Events and Sprint Activities
(Insert Figure 1 here. All images will be applied with a thin, gray border.)
Product Backlog and Backlog Refinement. The team translated interview findings, survey inputs, and system requirements into user stories and prioritized backlog items. Backlog refinement was conducted regularly to clarify acceptance criteria, re-estimate effort, and re-order priorities based on technical feasibility and stakeholder feedback. Deliverables included an updated Product Backlog, requirement mapping notes, and sprint-ready stories.
Sprint Planning. At the start of each sprint, the team selected the highest-priority backlog items and defined a clear sprint goal aligned with research objectives. Planning outputs also included task decomposition, dependency identification, and assignment of implementation targets for frontend, backend, AI, and blockchain-related tasks. Deliverables included the Sprint Backlog, sprint goal statement, and implementation task list.
Sprint Execution (with Daily Scrum). During sprint execution, the team held short daily coordination sessions to report progress, identify blockers, and synchronize work. Core engineering activities were performed within the sprint, including interface design refinement, feature development, API integration, validation checks, and defect fixing. Outputs included working increments of mobile/web modules, backend services, AI functions, blockchain components, and corresponding test and issue records.
Sprint Review. At the end of each sprint, completed increments were demonstrated to advisers and stakeholder representatives for functional and usability validation. Feedback from the review was documented and converted into backlog updates for the next sprint cycle to ensure continuous alignment with user and study requirements. Deliverables included sprint review notes, accepted increments, and change requests.
Sprint Retrospective. After the review, the team conducted a retrospective to evaluate what worked well, what problems occurred, and what process improvements were needed. Agreed improvement actions were carried forward to the next sprint to improve workflow efficiency, quality control, and collaboration. Deliverables included retrospective findings and actionable process improvement items.
Release and Deployment Preparation. After iterative sprint cycles, the team consolidated validated increments and prepared the prototype for controlled release and demonstration. Activities included environment configuration, final integration and regression checks, documentation completion, and readiness verification for academic evaluation. Deliverables included the prototype build, user guide/manual, deployment notes, and demonstration checklist.


System Architecture Overview
The proposed system follows a three-tier architecture consisting of the presentation layer, application layer, and data layer. This architecture enforces separation of concerns so that user interaction channels, business logic, and data services can evolve independently while remaining integrated through secure APIs.
        Presentation Layer. The presentation layer includes a Flutter-based mobile application for informal-sector microentrepreneurs and a web dashboard for loan officers and administrators. The mobile application supports onboarding, guidance access, profiling inputs, and loan-readiness interactions, while the web dashboard supports monitoring, application review, decision support, and reporting workflows.
        Application Layer. The application layer is implemented using Python Django and Django REST Framework as the central service orchestration layer. It manages authentication and role-based access, profile and document handling, AI-enabled chatbot and profiling logic, loan pre-qualification and lifecycle workflows, notifications, analytics, and blockchain transaction coordination through backend service integration.
        Data Layer. The data layer consists of MongoDB Atlas for operational data storage, document storage services for uploaded files, and Ethereum smart contracts for tamper-resistant integrity records. MongoDB Atlas stores user, profile, loan, interaction, and audit data, while blockchain records are used for immutable verification references. Sensitive personal data remain off-chain, and only integrity-relevant references are written to blockchain.
Figure 2
Three Tier Architecture
```mermaid
flowchart TB
  subgraph PL[Presentation Layer]
    M[Flutter Mobile Application]
    W[Web Dashboard]
  end

  subgraph AL[Application Layer - Django REST]
    API[API Gateway]
    CORE[Core Services: Auth, Profiles, Documents, Loans, Analytics, Notifications]
    AIM[AI Module: Chatbot and Profiling]
    BCM[Blockchain Module]
  end

  subgraph DL[Data Layer]
    MDB[(MongoDB Atlas - Operational Data)]
    DS[(Document Storage)]
    ETH[(Ethereum Smart Contracts - Integrity Records)]
  end

  M --> API
  W --> API
  API --> CORE
  CORE --> AIM
  CORE --> BCM
  CORE --> MDB
  CORE --> DS
  BCM --> ETH
```
Tools and Technologies Used
The development of the proposed system utilizes the following tools and technologies:
Programming Languages. Python is used for backend services, API processing, and business logic orchestration. TypeScript and JavaScript are used for frontend web development to improve maintainability and type-safe component integration. Dart is used for the Flutter mobile application (assumed integrated mobile codebase) to support cross-platform deployment. Solidity is used for Ethereum-compatible smart contract development for integrity and audit-related transaction records.
Frontend Technologies and Libraries. The web interface is developed using React and React DOM, with routing through React Router DOM. State and asynchronous data handling use TanStack React Query, TanStack React Table, Axios, and Zustand to support responsive dashboards and workflow-driven views. Form and validation components use React Hook Form, @hookform/resolvers, and Zod to enforce structured user input. UI and interaction libraries include Radix UI components (alert-dialog, avatar, dialog, dropdown-menu, label, select, slot, tabs, tooltip), Tailwind CSS, @tailwindcss/vite, tailwind-merge, class-variance-authority, clsx, Framer Motion, Lucide React, Recharts, Sonner, React Error Boundary, and date-fns. These technologies collectively support usability, accessibility, and visual consistency required for role-based loan management interfaces.
Backend Frameworks and Libraries. The backend is implemented using Django, Django REST Framework, and django-cors-headers to deliver secure RESTful services across client platforms. Data access and utility support include PyMongo and dnspython for MongoDB connectivity. Authentication and security components include djangorestframework-simplejwt, PyJWT, and bcrypt. Two-factor authentication and OTP-related components use pyotp, qrcode, and Pillow. API integrations use requests. Background processing tools include Celery, django-celery-beat, and Redis for scheduled and asynchronous tasks. Environment and runtime support use python-dotenv, pytz, certifi, python-dateutil, asgiref, WhiteNoise, and Gunicorn.
AI and Machine Learning Technologies. AI guidance and conversational responses are integrated through the Groq API service to support user education and decision-support interactions. Document-analysis model tooling includes PyTorch (torch), torchvision, and OpenCV (opencv-python) for CNN-based workflows related to document verification and classification. These technologies support the study objective of AI-enabled loan guidance and profiling assistance.
Blockchain Technologies. Smart contracts are implemented in Solidity and managed using Hardhat for compilation, testing, and deployment workflows. The blockchain toolchain includes @nomicfoundation/hardhat-toolbox, @nomicfoundation/hardhat-verify, @openzeppelin/contracts, @openzeppelin/contracts-upgradeable, and @openzeppelin/hardhat-upgrades, with code quality support from solhint, prettier, and prettier-plugin-solidity. This stack supports transparent, tamper-resistant recording of integrity-relevant events.
Database and Storage. MongoDB Atlas is used as the primary cloud-based NoSQL database for user, profile, application, interaction, and audit records. Document files are stored through the system document storage layer, while blockchain outputs are stored as integrity references on Ethereum-compatible networks. This arrangement keeps sensitive personal information off-chain while preserving auditability for critical transactions.
Testing and Quality Assurance Tools. Frontend unit and component testing use Vitest, @vitest/ui, @vitest/coverage-v8, jsdom, @testing-library/react, @testing-library/jest-dom, and @testing-library/user-event. End-to-end testing uses Playwright to validate cross-page behavior and role-based workflows. Code quality enforcement uses Biome, Husky, and lint-staged to maintain consistent coding standards and reduce integration defects.
Build, Deployment, and Runtime Tools. Frontend build and development use Vite (Rolldown-Vite) and @vitejs/plugin-react for fast iteration and optimized production builds. Backend deployment uses Gunicorn with Procfile-based process definition and Python runtime configuration. Background scheduling uses Celery Beat with Redis broker/backend support, enabling periodic maintenance and operational automation.
Development and Collaboration Tools. Visual Studio Code (VS Code) is used as the primary development environment across frontend, backend, AI, and blockchain modules. Git and GitHub are used for source control, collaboration, and revision traceability throughout Scrum iterations. Insomnia and/or Postman are used for API endpoint testing and integration verification during development and testing phases.


Population and Locale of Study
The population of the study consists of informal-sector microentrepreneurs in Dagupan City, particularly sari-sari store owners and market vendors, who serve as the primary intended users and evaluators of the proposed mobile application. These respondents are selected because they directly represent the target beneficiaries of the system’s loan guidance and profiling support, and their inputs are essential in assessing usability, clarity of guidance, and relevance of system features within real-world informal business contexts.
In addition, selected loan officers or lending personnel serve as supporting respondents, particularly for evaluating the usefulness of dashboard-based monitoring features and the practicality of profiling outputs for ethical pre-screening support. This additional group contributes professional insights into how the system’s outputs may align with preliminary lending workflows without performing actual loan approval or disbursement within the prototype scope.
The locale of the study is PHINMA–University of Pangasinan and selected barangays in Dagupan City. System development, configuration, and controlled testing activities are conducted within the academic environment of PHINMA–University of Pangasinan, while needs assessment and usability-related feedback are gathered from selected barangays where informal-sector microentrepreneurs conduct regular business activities.[d]


Data Gathering Techniques
Data gathering techniques play a crucial role in the study as they provide the necessary information needed for system development and evaluation. The selected techniques are intended to capture both user requirements and usability feedback to ensure that the proposed solution aligns with the practical needs of informal-sector microentrepreneurs and the functional expectations of loan officers.


Interviews. Interviews are conducted with informal-sector microentrepreneurs to obtain direct insights into their borrowing habits, loan-related concerns, and common challenges experienced during loan inquiries and informal lending practices. This technique supports the identification of pain points that the system must address, such as confusion on loan terms, fear of rejection, lack of documentation, and limited awareness of safer lending options.


Survey Questionnaires. Survey questionnaires are administered using Google Forms to collect structured feedback from respondents regarding the usability, clarity, and perceived usefulness of the mobile application. The questionnaire focuses on user experience indicators such as ease of navigation, understandability of financial guidance content, and overall satisfaction with the proposed features.


Observation. Observation is conducted to understand the current manual lending-related practices and informal borrowing processes within the target community. Through observation, the researchers document typical workflows, information exchange patterns, and constraints that influence how microentrepreneurs seek financial support, which helps ensure that the system design remains realistic and context-appropriate.[e]




Sources of Data
Data is a critical component of the study because the accuracy of system design decisions and evaluation outcomes depends on the quality and relevance of collected information. To ensure that the proposed system is grounded in actual user needs and lending-related realities, data are obtained from both primary and secondary sources. 


Primary Sources. The primary sources of data include informal-sector microentrepreneurs and loan officers. Microentrepreneurs provide requirement-based inputs and usability feedback related to loan guidance, profiling questions, and user interface accessibility. Loan officers provide insights regarding the usefulness and interpretability of profiling outputs and monitoring features within a pre-screening support context.


Secondary Sources. Secondary data are obtained from existing studies and references related to microfinance, digital financial inclusion, and alternative data-based profiling. This includes relevant Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) reports and materials that describe financial inclusion conditions, as well as sample loan application forms and lending-related documents used as references for identifying common borrower data requirements and typical evaluation criteria.


And so on… The table formatting should follow the
design given below.
The table shows the total number of respondents of
this study.


Table 1
Respondents of the Study


Position No. of Respondents


Alumni Officer-In-Charge 1
College Deans 5[f]


Treatment of Data
The treatment of data describes how the information gathered in the study is handled after collection to ensure accuracy, consistency, and data security throughout the project. The procedures outlined in this section guide the collection, processing, analysis, and storage of data produced through system use and evaluation activities.


Data Collection. Data are collected through structured inputs captured within the mobile application, including user registration details, business profile entries, and loan-related queries submitted during interaction with the system. Additional evaluation data are gathered through interview notes, survey questionnaire responses, and documented observations of existing lending-related practices.


Data Processing. The collected data are cleaned and validated to ensure completeness and consistency prior to use in system processing and evaluation. Input validation and format checking are implemented using Django’s validation framework to reduce inconsistent entries and improve reliability of stored records. Inconsistent inputs, such as variations in date formats or incomplete field submissions, are normalized through defined validation rules and controlled input constraints to maintain standardized data representation.


Data Analysis. Descriptive analysis is applied to summarize user feedback collected from survey questionnaires and usability-related responses. The results support refinement of interface design, content clarity, and feature prioritization. In addition, AI algorithms are applied to analyze user-provided indicators and interaction patterns for profiling support, producing guidance-oriented outputs intended to inform users about loan readiness and responsible borrowing considerations within the prototype scope.


Data Storage and Backups. Collected data are stored in MongoDB Atlas using security controls appropriate for prototype implementation, including encryption in transit and at rest and role-based access restrictions to limit viewing and management of records to authorized users only. To prevent data loss while the application is in use, the database is configured under MongoDB Atlas’ high-availability setup (replication with automatic failover), ensuring continuity of stored records even if a node becomes unavailable. In addition, automated scheduled backups (snapshots) are enabled to provide restorable copies of the database in cases of accidental deletion, corruption, or operational failure, with backup access restricted to designated administrator accounts and recovery procedures validated through controlled restoration checks. For transaction integrity and auditability, immutable references such as hashes and transaction identifiers are recorded through Ethereum smart contracts, allowing critical verification logs to remain tamper-resistant even when database restoration is performed.[g]


Ethical Considerations
        Ethical considerations guide the development and implementation of the proposed system to ensure responsible use of technology, protection of user data, and inclusivity for informal-sector users. The study emphasizes secure handling of information, fair system behavior, and transparent communication of system purpose and limitations, particularly because the proposed application involves user profiling and guidance that may influence financial decision-making.


        Security and Privacy of Data. The study implements security measures to protect sensitive information collected from microentrepreneurs and loan officers. These measures include encryption of stored records, hashing of passwords, and strict access control protocols that limit data visibility based on user roles. Data captured through interviews and surveys are handled confidentially, and only aggregated or non-identifying summaries are used in reporting to prevent exposure of personal or business-sensitive details.


Fair and Inclusive Design. The AI profiling component is designed to support inclusive and ethical guidance for unbanked and underserved users. Profiling outputs are treated as decision-support indicators rather than deterministic judgments, and the system is structured to avoid discriminatory assumptions that could disadvantage users with limited formal records. The study emphasizes the use of relevant and explainable indicators and supports iterative review of profiling logic to minimize bias risks and improve fairness for diverse informal-sector contexts.


Transparency of Information. Transparency is maintained by informing users about the purpose, scope, and limitations of the system. Users are clearly informed that the “Smart Loan Support” features provide educational guidance and readiness support and do not serve as a guarantee of loan approval, bank endorsement, or actual loan disbursement. The system’s outputs are presented as recommendations intended to promote responsible borrowing decisions and clearer understanding of loan concepts, thereby managing expectations and supporting ethical use of technology in a lending-related context.
          
[a]image
[b]image
[d]hmm idk about this shit
[e]hmmmm
[f]di ko alam to
[g]hohohooh
